README.rst, before:

Genome Collector
================
.. image:: https://travis-ci.org/Edinburgh-Genome-Foundry/genome_collector.svg?branch=master
   :target: https://travis-ci.org/Edinburgh-Genome-Foundry/genome_collector
   :alt: Travis CI build status

.. image:: https://coveralls.io/repos/github/Edinburgh-Genome-Foundry/genome_collector/badge.svg?branch=master
   :target: https://coveralls.io/github/Edinburgh-Genome-Foundry/genome_collector?branch=master


Genome Collector (full documentation `here <https://edinburgh-genome-foundry.github.io/genome_collector/>`_) is a Python library to
download and store genomes and blast databases for specific TaxIDs. The data
is downloaded automatically and on a need-to basis. This makes it very easy for
Python libraries and web applications to use reference genomes of E. coli,
S. cerevisiae, and so on, without the worry of manually downloading the
genome data.

Example
-------

Let's get a local path to an E. coli BLAST database:

.. code:: python

    from genome_collector import GenomeCollection
    collection = GenomeCollection()
    db_path = collection.get_taxid_blastdb_path(taxid=511145, db_type='nucl')

The returned ``db_path`` is a path to a local nucleotide BLAST database for
E. coli. If there was no E. coli database on your machine, Genome Collector
downloaded the genome data and built the BLAST database to make sure that
the returned path actually points to a database (this is a one-off download
which won't happen again as long as the files stay there).

You can now use the ``db_path`` to start a BLAST process:

.. code:: python

    import subprocess
    process = subprocess.run([
        'blastn', '-db', db_path, '-query', 'queries.fa', '-out', 'results.txt'
    ])


For convenience you can also BLAST in a single command, which will automatically
create the path to the database, and create the BLAST database from scratch
if it doesn't exist:

.. code:: python

    collection.blast_against_taxid('511145', 'nucl', [
        'blastn', '-query', 'blast_test.fa', "-out", 'result.txt'
    ])


Usage tips
----------

Changing the data storage directory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can decide where a collection's local files will be stored with the
``data_dir`` parameter of ``GenomeCollection``. Note that the default value for
``data_dir`` is highly recommended as it always points to the same local user
data folder. As a consequence, all librairies and applications using the default
will be able to pick genomes from the same folder. The path of this default
folder, stored at ``collection.data_dir``, is platform-specific:

- ``~/.local/share/genome_collector`` on Linux
- ``~/Library/Application Support/genome_collector`` on MacOS
- ``C:\Documents and Settings\<User>\Application Data\Local Settings\EGF\genome_collector`` on Windows

You can set the local default path globally at the beginning of your Python
script with:

.. code:: python

    from genome_collector import GenomeCollection
    GenomeCollection.default_dir = '/my/new/dir'

Finally, you can set a default path as an environment variable (so it will be
shared by different Python processes):

.. code::

    env GENOME_COLLECTOR_DATA_DIR = /my/other/path



Preventing auto-download
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When using Genome Collector in a particular project, for instance a web app,
you may want to pre-download only a few genomes, and prevent users from using
other genomes. This can be done by setting a collection's ``autodownload``
attribute to False. To globally prevent Genome Collector from downloadind
data files, set this attribute at class level:

.. code:: python

    GenomeCollection.autodownload = False


Command line interface
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The very basic command-line interface enables to use Genome Collector to
pre-download genomes and pre-build BLAST databases on a machine. This can
be particularly useful in Dockerfiles to set up docker containers.

.. code::

    python -m genome_collector genome 511145
    python -m genome_collector blast_db 511145 nucl


By default these genomes will be downloaded to the platform-specific local
data folder. This can be changed by adding a data_dir at the end:

.. code::

    python -m genome_collector genome 511145 /path/to/some/dir/

Or by setting an environment variable before running these commands:

.. code::

    env GENOME_COLLECTOR_DATA_DIR = /my/other/path

Installation
-------------

You can install genome_collector through PIP

.. code::

    sudo pip install genome_collector

Alternatively, you can unzip the sources in a folder and type

.. code::

    sudo python setup.py install
  
For the BLAST-related features to work, you must have the NCBI BLAST software
installed. For instance on Ubuntu install with:
::
    sudo apt-get install ncbi-blast+

License = MIT
--------------

genome_collector is an open-source software originally written at the
`Edinburgh Genome Foundry <http://genomefoundry.org>`_ by
`Zulko <https://github.com/Zulko>`_ and
`released on Github <https://github.com/Edinburgh-Genome-Foundry/genome_collector>`_
under the MIT licence (copyright Edinburgh Genome Foundry).

Everyone is welcome to contribute !

More biology software
---------------------

.. image:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Edinburgh-Genome-Foundry/Edinburgh-Genome-Foundry.github.io/master/static/imgs/logos/egf-codon-horizontal.png
  :target: https://edinburgh-genome-foundry.github.io/

genome_collector is part of the `EGF Codons <https://edinburgh-genome-foundry.github.io/>`_ synthetic biology software suite for DNA design, manufacturing and validation.

Commit message:

Now able to download protein_fasta, genomic_genbank.

README.rst, after:

Genome Collector
================
.. image:: https://travis-ci.org/Edinburgh-Genome-Foundry/genome_collector.svg?branch=master
   :target: https://travis-ci.org/Edinburgh-Genome-Foundry/genome_collector
   :alt: Travis CI build status

.. image:: https://coveralls.io/repos/github/Edinburgh-Genome-Foundry/genome_collector/badge.svg?branch=master
   :target: https://coveralls.io/github/Edinburgh-Genome-Foundry/genome_collector?branch=master


Genome Collector (full documentation
`here <https://edinburgh-genome-foundry.github.io/genome_collector/>`_)
is a Python library to download and manage reference genome data for specific
TaxIDs, in particular nucleotide and protein sequences (in fasta/genbank/gff
formats), and BLAST databases (nucl/prot).

The data is downloaded automatically on a need-to basis, making it very easy
for Python projects to use and re-use reference genomes of E. coli,
S. cerevisiae, and so on, without the worry of manually downloading from NCBI.

Example
-------

Let's get a local path to an E. coli BLAST database:

.. code:: python

    from genome_collector import GenomeCollection
    collection = GenomeCollection()
    db_path = collection.get_taxid_blastdb_path(taxid=511145, db_type='nucl')

The returned ``db_path`` is a path to a local nucleotide BLAST database for
E. coli. If there was no E. coli database on your machine, Genome Collector
downloaded the genome data and built the BLAST database to make sure that
the returned path actually points to a database (this is a one-off download
which won't happen again as long as the files stay there).

You can now use the ``db_path`` to start a BLAST process:

.. code:: python

    import subprocess
    process = subprocess.run([
        'blastn', '-db', db_path, '-query', 'queries.fa', '-out', 'results.txt'
    ])


For convenience you can also BLAST in a single command, which will automatically
create the path to the database, and create the BLAST database from scratch
if it doesn't exist:

.. code:: python

    collection.blast_against_taxid('511145', 'nucl', [
        'blastn', '-query', 'blast_test.fa', "-out", 'result.txt'
    ])


Usage tips
----------

Changing the data storage directory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can decide where a collection's local files will be stored with the
``data_dir`` parameter of ``GenomeCollection``. Note that the default value for
``data_dir`` is highly recommended as it always points to the same local user
data folder. As a consequence, all librairies and applications using the default
will be able to pick genomes from the same folder. The path of this default
folder, stored at ``collection.data_dir``, is platform-specific:

- ``~/.local/share/genome_collector`` on Linux
- ``~/Library/Application Support/genome_collector`` on MacOS
- ``C:\Documents and Settings\<User>\Application Data\Local Settings\EGF\genome_collector`` on Windows

You can set the local default path globally at the beginning of your Python
script with:

.. code:: python

    from genome_collector import GenomeCollection
    GenomeCollection.default_dir = '/my/new/dir'

Finally, you can set a default path as an environment variable (so it will be
shared by different Python processes):

.. code::

    env GENOME_COLLECTOR_DATA_DIR = /my/other/path



Preventing auto-download
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When using Genome Collector in a particular project, for instance a web app,
you may want to pre-download only a few genomes, and prevent users from using
other genomes. This can be done by setting a collection's ``autodownload``
attribute to False. To globally prevent Genome Collector from downloadind
data files, set this attribute at class level:

.. code:: python

    GenomeCollection.autodownload = False


Command line interface
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The very basic command-line interface enables to use Genome Collector to
pre-download genomes and pre-build BLAST databases on a machine. This can
be particularly useful in Dockerfiles to set up docker containers.

.. code::

    python -m genome_collector genome 511145
    python -m genome_collector blast_db 511145 nucl


By default these genomes will be downloaded to the platform-specific local
data folder. This can be changed by adding a data_dir at the end:

.. code::

    python -m genome_collector genome 511145 /path/to/some/dir/

Or by setting an environment variable before running these commands:

.. code::

    env GENOME_COLLECTOR_DATA_DIR = /my/other/path

Installation
-------------

You can install genome_collector through PIP

.. code::

    sudo pip install genome_collector

Alternatively, you can unzip the sources in a folder and type

.. code::

    sudo python setup.py install
  
For the BLAST-related features to work, you must have the NCBI BLAST software
installed. For instance on Ubuntu install with:
::
    sudo apt-get install ncbi-blast+

License = MIT
--------------

genome_collector is an open-source software originally written at the
`Edinburgh Genome Foundry <http://genomefoundry.org>`_ by
`Zulko <https://github.com/Zulko>`_ and
`released on Github <https://github.com/Edinburgh-Genome-Foundry/genome_collector>`_
under the MIT licence (copyright Edinburgh Genome Foundry).

Everyone is welcome to contribute !

More biology software
---------------------

.. image:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Edinburgh-Genome-Foundry/Edinburgh-Genome-Foundry.github.io/master/static/imgs/logos/egf-codon-horizontal.png
  :target: https://edinburgh-genome-foundry.github.io/

genome_collector is part of the `EGF Codons <https://edinburgh-genome-foundry.github.io/>`_ synthetic biology software suite for DNA design, manufacturing and validation.
